# Overview

The ToIP Trust Registry Query Protocol (TRQP) is a lightweight, read-only
protocol for making fast, efficient queries for authoritative data from trust
registries, also known as trust lists. To use an analogy, TRQP is to trust
registries what DNS is to name servers.

The same way DNS name servers serve name domains, TRQP trust registries serve
trust domains, also known as digital trust ecosystems. Four primary actors
participate in the flow of verifiable data (including verifiable credentials)
within the ecosystem: 1) data producers (issuers), 2) data subjects (holders),
3) data consumers (verifiers or relying parties), and 4) governing bodies
(authorities).

Authorities determine the policies governing which actors can perform what
actions on what data within the ecosystem. These policies are typically
published in a human-readable form called a governance framework, also known as
a trust framework. To make these policies accessible to software agents, they
are published in a machine-readable form known as authority statements.
Authority statements can be published in a file, issued to individual actors as
verifiable credentials, or published in a trust registry.

Digitally-verifiable authority statements can be expressed using various
standards, including X.509 certificate hierarchies, OpenID Federations, EBSI
Trust Chains, or TRAIN trust lists. Although these standards can work well for
intra-ecosystem authority verification, they are not optimized for
inter-ecosystem authority verification.

The purpose of TRQP is to bridge this gap by provide a standard protocol for
querying authority statements from any TRQP-compliant trust registry. It
specifies a standard data model, query vocabulary, and transport protocol
binding that can be implemented by any ecosystem regardless of its internal
trust architecture.

TRQP focuses on three query types:

1. Authorization Queries: “Has Entity X been granted Authorization Y under
   Ecosystem Governance Framework Z?”
2. Recognition Queries: “Is Ecosystem A recognized as an authority for
   Governance Framework B by Ecosystem C?”

# specification-template

This specification is basked on the [Trust Over IP Specification Template](https://github.com/trustoverip/specification-template).

The spec is written using [SpecUp](https://github.com/decentralized-identity/spec-up) which is maintained by the Decentralized Identity Foundation. 


To browse the spec, see the [rendering on GitHub pages](https://trustoverip.github.io/tswg-trust-registry-protocol/). To contribute to the spec, submit PRs that modify the .md files (in the `./spec` folder) that are used to generate the .html files in this folder.

Before submitting a PR, please see the [Editing The Spec](./EditingTheSpec.md) document for guidance on generating the specification locally for review.


## Rendering Spec-Up

To run Spec-up in live edit mode (will re-render upon save), in project folder run:

```
npm run edit
```
